---
layout: post
title: Spontaneous parametric down-conversion
image: assets/social/spdc.jpg
---

Spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC)
is a workhorse in quantum optics labs as a
way to generate entangled pairs of photons.
A *pump* laser (shown in blue) is sent through a non-linear crystal
to create entangled pairs (red).

{% include spdc_embed.html level="level2" %}

Most of the pump beam just passes straight through the crystal,
but occasionally one pump photon is *down-converted*
to create an *entangled pair* of photons.
The pair is *time-energy* entangled
because 
they are born at the same time
and the original photon's energy is split between them.

In some forms of SPDC the pair *evenly* splits the pump photon's momentum (energy),
and each pair leaves the crystal at equal-but-opposite angles
with respect to the pump beam.
Every pair spreads apart at a similar *opening angle*,
but oriented randomly around the pump beam.
The result is that all the pairs form a cone shape.
You can make the cone wider or narrower by
rotating the crystal so 
the pump hits it at different angles.

To collect entangled pairs, you need to capture
photons from two points on exact opposite sides of the cone.
You'll miss the pairs everywhere else, but
you will pick up both photons from pairs that travel along
that particular slice of the cone.
It's common to name the photons in a pair as signals and idlers,
and to collect each into
their own piece of fiber optic cable.
The fiber can route them to additional experimental apparatus
so they can be manipulated, detected and counted.

The interactive demo above contains simplified versions of all
the key components of SPDC.
You can try your hand at collecting entangled
pairs into fiber by hitting the **jitter** button
to shake up the alignment.
Try rotating components to realign the setup
and get the power meters back up to ~100%.

I’ve been working with an SPDC setup recently and found that
aligning the pump, crystal and collection optics can be quite exacting.
In real life, the ultraviolet pump laser will blind you if you look at it
and the SPDC cone is completely invisible!
So aligning an actual setup can be considerably trickier than the demo.
I'll follow up with another article
that outlines practical procedures for aligning SPDC in the lab.
